.. summary Description of Cyclus Ecosystem

====================================
 The *Cyclus* Community & Ecosystem
====================================


An important goal of the *Cyclus* effort is to attract a community of
developers contributing to a vibrant ecosystem of models for use by
users.  However, due to sensitivities regarding the distribution of
software for simulating nuclear systems, this ecosystem requires
careful considerations in its design and implementation.

Critical to the success of this community is the widespread
availability of the core infrastructure of the Cyclus simulation
environment.  Because this environment is formulated using a variety
of very generic concepts - not specific to nuclear energy systems -
this should mitigate concerns for the open source distribution of this
core infrastructure.  

Moreover, this infrastructure is also designed to allow for the
addition of run-time modules, or plug-ins, that can be developed and
distributed under any possible licensing scheme.  These modules will
be distributed separately from the core infrastructure, and the
distribution responsibility will rest with the developer of each
module.  This system will insulate the core infrastructure from
accidental "pollution" by modules of a sensitive nature, and similarly
limit issues regarding the authorization for distribution to the
author's organization.  Ideally, most module developers will be
authorized for open distribution of their modules.

Finally, the community will be relied upon to provide review and
curation of available modules, establishing both quality assurance
practices and recommendations for best use cases for each contributed
module.

Below, a more detailed exposition of these characteristics is
provided.

Open Source Core Infrastructure
================================

The current portfolio of fuel cycle simulators has been characterized
by barriers to adoption by new users and developers including:

* policies of limited/restricted distribution,
* reliance on propriety software development infrastructures, and
* deeply embedded nuclear technology assumptions arising from
  development path.

Since, one of the principle purposes of *Cyclus* is to create a fuel
cycle simulator system with a low barrier to adoption, a policy of
open source distribution of this core infrastructure is critical to
its mission.  (*Cyclus* is also committed to free and widely used
software development tools, such as GNU compilers, SQLite, Boost,
etc.)  The *Cyclus* core is currently available via it's `Git hub
repository <http://github.com/cyclus/cyclus>`_.  Interested users and
developers are invited to make their own copy of this repository,
review the list of open issues, and participate in the developers
mailing list. Like all open source projects, this distribution mode
permits a thorough code review by interested parties and the
possibility of contributions in order to identify/resolve defects or
request/provide feature enhancements.

The *Cyclus* core infrastructure provides :doc:`a generic environment
<../devdoc/cyclus_env>` for modeling flows of materials among a
collection of nuclear facilities.  This infrastructure could be used
for modeling many different supply chain systems, nuclear and
non-nuclear alike, although the introduction of features to this
infrastructure is prioritized to facilitate nuclear systems analysis.
In addition to addressing the barrier of deeply embedded nuclear
technology assumptions, one consequence of this approach is that the
core infrastructure has a very low risk of containing sensitive
information regarding the simulation of nuclear systems.  These
capabilities are added by acquiring and invoking plug-in modules
developed and distributed by the *Cyclus* community.

The open source approach can also allow the project to leverage the
efforts a larger pool of developers and improve the quality of the
software product [1]_.

Decentralized Module Development & Distribution
===============================================

When a user/developer wishes to contribute a new module to the
*Cyclus* ecosystem, they will be responsible for all aspects of that
distribution.  The *Cyclus* core development team will provide a
catalog of available modules (details are still under development),
but this catalog will point to external distribution sites that are
consistent with each contributors personal and/or institutional needs.
For example, developers who are permitted to follow an open source
approach with their own contributions can have their own Github
account and share their modules through the same mechanism as - but a
different location from - the *Cyclus* core.  For some subset of open
source distribution mechanisms, the *Cyclus* core will include tools
to make it easier for individual users to download and install
contributed modules or collections of modules.

Decentralizing the development and distribution of run-time plug-in
modules provides a number of benefits.  First, as is true for the core
infrastructure, this opens the door for a larger pool of developers to
contribute to the *Cyclus* ecosystem, by providing modules that
represent their organizations specific technical interest.  If a
particular user/developer would like to understand the impact of their
own technology on the greater fuel cycle, they are free to develop a
module that simulates this technology and contribute it to the broader
community.

More importantly, this will contribute to the maintenance of a
"pristine" core infrastructure, from the point of view of sensitive
information.  Since any software added to the source code repository
leaves behind permanent artifacts, even if removed at a later date,
inclusion of plug-in modules in a single common software repository
would pose the risk that the entire repository could be declared
sensitive at some future date.  Decentralized distribution mitigates
this risk.

Finally, this decentralized approach removes the burden of authorizing
distribution and reviewing contributions from a central authority.  A
centralized approach would require identifying a single organization
that would accept an ongoing burden of authorizing distribution,
assessing quality and assembling collections.  A decentralized
approach leaves those functions in the hands of the authors and
community as described in the following sections.

Distribution Authorization by Owner
-----------------------------------

Between concerns for copyright and intellectual property, and the risk
that sensitive information could be inadvertently introduced into a
plug-in module, the burden of acquiring and confirming distribution
rights by a centralized organization could become prohibitive.  If,
instead, the *Cyclus* ecosystem is captured in a catalog that refers
to a variety distribution sites as appropriate for each developer, the
effort for ensuring the rights for distribution are in the hands of
the developer and their organization.  The inclusion of a given module
in the catalog requires little oversight and the details of
distribution remain between the provider and consumer of each module.

Peer-review QA and Rating
---------------------------

For most organizations, including a plug-in module in a centralized
software distribution would be regarded as a tacit approval of the
quality and utility of the module.  In most such cases, a substantial
burden of quality assurance and testing would be required by the
organization preforming this centralized distribution.  In the
decentralized approach of the *Cyclus* ecosystem, mechanisms will be
provided for members of the community to provide peer-review of the
modules' quality and applicability to certain problems.

For modules that are distributed with an open source policy, other
users and developers will be able to perform a direct source code
review as well as testing the functionality of the module in a fuel
cycle analysis.  For other distribution policies, more limited review
will be possible.

In all cases, practices and policies will emerge from the community to
support standardization of this process.  For example, providing
adequate documentation and test suites will result in a better review
from members of the community and ultimately will become
pre-requisites to a positive peer review.

Curation and Collections
-------------------------

When the number of contributions is sufficiently large, there will be
benefit in developing collections of modules that are known to be
useful for certain types of simulations.  A decentralized approach
will allow individual members of the *Cyclus* community to create such
collections, providing a curation function to help both new and
experienced users identify the modules that are likely to give them
the most benefit.

Footnotes
^^^^^^^^^

.. [1] J.W. Paulson, *et al*, "An Empirical Study of Open-Source and Closed-Source Software Products", *IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering*, **30** (4), April 2004. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=01274044
