.. summary Introduction to the Cyclus Fuel Cycle Simulator

:version: Document v1.2 - 9/28/2011

Introduction to the *Cyclus* Fuel Cycle Simulator
=================================================


The Computational Nuclear Engineering Research Group (CNERG) of the University
of  Wisconsin-Madison (UW) has been developing a next generation nuclear fuel
cycle simulation platform called *Cyclus* whose genesis was driven by a variety
of gaps seen in previous fuel cycle simulation efforts.  Three major design and
development philosophies encompass the current fleet of fuel cycle simulators:

  #. A desire for usability, thus developing a tool which begins with a simple
     model in a visual development environment that aims to provide an intuitive
     user interface (e.g. DYMOND, DANESS, VISION)
  
  #. A desire for rapid prototyping, thus developing a tool which begins with
     simple models in a scripting language that allows for quick answers to early
     problems (e.g.  CAFCA, GENIUS v1)
  
  #. A desire for detail/fidelity, thus developing a tool with an ad-hoc
     combination of existing complex analysis tools (e.g. COSI)

Experience has demonstrated that each of these philosophies can be hindered from
simulating some classes of interesting problems due to complexity limits.  In most cases this
complexity constrains first the usability of the tool followed by its
extendability due to increasingly convoluted dependencies. The final victim is
performance, as the ability to quickly solve simple problems is lost to the
desire to solve more complex ones.  

In addition to these technical challenges, there is also an institutional
challenge.  A combination of closed development platforms and closed
development processes has made it difficult for an individual researcher to
incorporate their ideas into a fuel cycle systems analysis.  The ability to
combine existing systems simulation tools with data about new facilities or
fuel cycle concepts is so challenging that many researchers either choose to
avoid systems analysis altogether or to write their own simplified tool
(usually in category 2 above).  These new, special purpose fuel cycle
simulation tools involve a duplication of effort and generally lack any robust
benchmarking.

Each of these approaches lacks a design basis in computational science and
software development that can deliver the stated desired attributes of the
final software product:

  * usability -- accommodating a wide range of user sophistication
  * performance -- solving simple problems in interactive time scales
  * fidelity -- accommodating many levels of detail/fidelity, commensurate with a range of user sophistication

A complete nuclear fuel cycle simulator requires modeling efforts in a wide
variety of physical and social science domains.  This places a premium on a
software development process that will facilitate fluid collaboration among a
large group of geographically dispersed developers.  With this constraint in
mind, a number of software development practices can be identified as highly
valuable for this effort:

  * openness -- the process should have low institutional & technical obstacles to collaboration
  * modularity -- a particular approach to modularity should be pursued to allow the core infrastructure to be independent of proprietary and/or sensitive data and/or models
  * extensibility -- attention to both robustness and flexibility allows for myriad potential developer extensions

Mission
-------

*Cyclus*  will be a nuclear fuel cycle systems analysis software platform that
encourages collaboration among a diverse set of researchers. Emphasis will be
placed on both ease of collaboration through modularity as well as ubiquity in
order to analyze a significant number of possible future fuel cycle scenarios
succinctly and consistently.

Vision
------

In order to accomplish this mission, the *Cyclus* team has developed a vision
for the development of a next generation fuel cycle simulator that includes
elements of software architecture, software development process and
fundamental design paradigms.

Current Status
--------------

*Cyclus* is being developed in an open environment.  For the current status of *Cyclus*, visit http://cyclus.github.com.

Software Process & Architecture
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

As indicated above, the software architecture and accompanying development
process are critical to a simultaneously robust and flexible analysis platform.

Open Source Development Process
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Cyclus* development framework employs a modern, open source philosophy
that ensures transparency, attracts contributions from a varied community of
collaborators, and guarantees institution-independent access to all potential
users. In this development path, a public source code repository provides
unhindered access to the `fundamental simulation framework <http://github.com/cyclus/cyclys>`_ and 
`basic fuel cycle process models <http://github.com/cyclus/cycamore>`_ volunteered by developers.  
Granting unfettered access only to
the *Cyclus* engine allows for compartmentalization of the code and its input
data. Thus, secure and proprietary model developers can be similarly encouraged
to utilize the *Cyclus* framework. This modern development model passively
distributes specialized content to interested research groups, and facilitates
parallel model development efforts by institutions with complimentary goals.
The transparency inherent in this type of open source development path also
facilitates code review by exposing available content to verification and
validation by collaborators with diverse areas of specialization and levels of
expertise.

Another aspect of this development process is a preference for open source
third party libraries where additional functionality is necessary and available
from such libraries.  This includes basic infrastructure such as file
input/output, as well as model-specific capabilities like integer programming
for network flow optimization.

Dynamically-loadable Modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Dynamically-loadable modules are the primary mechanism for extending *Cyclus*
with new underlying models.  The primary benefit of this approach is
encapsulation: the trunk of the code is completely independent of the
individual models and all customization and extension is implemented only in
the loadable module.  A secondary benefit of this encapsulation is the ability
for contributors to choose different distribution and licensing strategies for
their contributions.  Finally, this strategy allows an individual developers
to explore different levels of complexity within their modules, including
wrapping other simulation tools as loadable modules for *Cyclus*.

Use Cases & Visualization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because of the wide array of use cases for *Cyclus*, flexibility in the user
interface is important to provide different kinds of users with different
experiences.  This is true for input generation as well as output
visualization.  A variety of graphical user interface modes have been designed
and will be implemented in parallel with the development of underlying modules.
The graphical interface should be extensible by loadable modules in the same
way as the core code to provide developers the same flexibility in managing
their input as they have in implementing their models.  Output visualization is
also important - the discrete facility/discrete material paradigm generates a
large volume of small data that needs to be aggregated in various ways to
provide context to a variety of users.

Modeling Paradigm
+++++++++++++++++

The modeling paradigm adopted by *Cyclus* includes a number of deeply embedded
fundamental concepts.  These basic design choices comprise the bedrock on which
most future design choices are made. The *Cyclus* team recognizes the
accompanying inflexibility to the code and therefore does not anticipate that
these attributes will change.

Discrete Facility & Discrete Material Objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The modeling infrastructure is designed such that every facility in a global
nuclear fuel cycle is treated individually.  While modeling options will exist
to allow collective action, this will be as a special case of the individual
facility basis.  Each facility will have two fundamental tasks: to transact
nuclear material with other facilities and to transform that nuclear material
from an input form to an output form.  These materials will be modeled as
discrete objects that exist for a finite time and whose composition and
transaction history is logged throughout the simulation.

Market-based Material Transactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The transaction of nuclear materials will take place in "markets" that act as
brokers to match a set of requests for material with a set of offers for that
material.  A variety of market models (see Vision: Software Architecture) will
be available to perform this broker role, but each market will act
independently of other markets.  Markets will used to model a variety of
decision making behaviors, not restricted to behaviors that simulate economic
activity.  Once the requests and offers have been matched, the facilities will
exchange material objects.

Region-Institution-Facility Hierarchy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Every discrete facility in *Cyclus* is owned by an institution that operates in
a geographic region.  An institution can be used to represent any entity that
may own and operate a facility such as a private corporation, a government
agency, or a non-governmental agency, among others.  A region can be used to
represent any geographic area, typically a politically relevant area such a
sub-national region (e.g. a U.S. State), a nation-state, or a super-national
region (e.g. the E.U.).  While some performance parameters of the facility may
depend on its institutional ownership or geographical location, the more
important use of this capability is to control the way in which a facility
engages in a market for trade of nuclear material based on by whom it is owned
and/or operated.

Optimization and Sensitivity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While the market models that form the basis of material transactions represent
largely social constructs, there is an initial desire to minimize the direct
simulation of institutional decision making to seek optimal solutions.
Instead, the fundamental approach is to drive a single simulation with a large
multi-dimensional data set and then allow modern optimization technology to
seek globally optimal solutions based on global objective functions.  Since
institutional decision making tends to seek an optimal solution only for the
actor making that decision (local optimization), it may not lead to an outcome
that optimizes for the largest population of stakeholders.
