.. 

Fuel Cycle Simulators
---------------------

A nuclear fuel cycle simulator is a tool used to explore the impacts
of alternative nuclear fuel cycle choices, when considered as a full
system at a national or international level.  Fundamentally, a nuclear
fuel cycle simulator tracks the flow of materials through the nuclear
fuel cycle, accounting for processes such as enrichment,
transmutation, decay, and partition of isotopes.  From these material
flows, and information about the operation history of the associated
facilities, various metrics can be assessed for different nuclear fuel
cycle designs.  As such, economic, environmental and security metrics
can compared to support decision making on research, development and
deployment decisions for future fuel cycle facilities.

Fuel cycle simulators provide insights into important trends as
nuclear fuel cycles undergo technological transitions in an uncertain
socio-political environment.  As such, while it is important to
achieve an overall conservation of mass, there is typically a
trade-off between the accuracy of specific isotopic compositions and
the speed of calculation, given the inherent uncertainty of making
predictions in unknown socio-political futures.  Therefore, the
physics models used for each individual process in the fuel cycle are
generally low-order approximations based on higher order analysis.

Fuel cycle simulators are not designed to provide detailed simulations
of specific facilities; neither high-fidelity predictive simulation nor
virtual reality environments.

History of Systems Analysis Tools
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Historically, a variety of systems analysis tools have been developed
to study nuclear fuel cycles.  One category of tools has been derived
from detailed facility models, arranged in complex coupling schemes,
and validated with detailed measurements from real systems.  While
these tools offer a much more rigorous treatment of the physics, and
more confidence in specific results, they often require much more time
and expertise in the analyst to compute the results, and may offer
more precision in the physics than is warranted given the
socio-political uncertainty.  The other main category of tools is
typically derived from simplified systems models, with physics detail
and complexity added where necessary to improve the fidelity of
results, but preferring rapid computation to excessive precision.

Regardless of the development path, these systems analysis tools have
inherent assumptions, limitations in their underlying software
infrastructure, and constraints on the variety of nuclear fuel cycle
options that can be assessed.  Comparing the results from different
tools, often in order to generate confidence in them all, can be
challenging and frequently requires oversimplified problems that
preclude the use of the advanced features of any one tool.

That said, there are a number of tools that are currently used around
the world to support systems decision on nuclear fuel cycle options:

   * VISION
   * DANESS
   * COSI
   * NUWASTE
   * CAFCA
   * NFCSim


